# Homeless services delivery system

Homeless services delivery system glossary of terms/acronyms. By Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority (LAHSA).

https://homeless.lacounty.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/25-Glossary-of-Terms-and-Acronyms.pdf

**Adults with HIV/AIDS**: This subpopulation category of the Point in Time (PIT) includes adults who have been diagnosed with AIDS and/or have tested positive for HIV.

**Adults with a Serious Mental Illness (SMI)**: This subpopulation category of the PIT includes adults with a severe and persistent mental illness or emotional impairment that seriously limits a person's ability to live independently. Adults with SMI must also meet the qualifications identified in the term for “disability” (e.g., “is expected to be long-continuing or indefinite duration”). 

**Adults with a Substance Use Disorder**: This subpopulation category of the PIT includes adults with a substance abuse problem (alcohol abuse, drug abuse, or both). Adults with a substance use disorder must also meet the qualifications identified in the term for “disability” (e.g., “is expected to be long-continuing or indefinite duration”).

**Bridge (Reserved Crisis) Housing**: Safe,reserved, 24‐hour emergency shelter to be utilized by eligible homeless individuals, identified through the Coordinated Entry System (CES). The intention of this emergency housing is to provide individuals with some stability, so that they can more easily maintain contact with their Housing Navigator, as they are assisted in their efforts to housing. Crisis Housing bed converts to a Bridge (Reserved Crisis) Housing bed if the program participantdoes not self-resolve their episode of homelessness within 14 days.

**Case Conferencing**: A region’s formal, planned, and structured meeting in which providers coordinate staffing assignments, provide client level updates, and ensure coordination of services. The goal of case conferencing is to provide holistic, coordinated, and integrated services across providers, and to reduce duplication. Case conferences are usually multidisciplinary, and include multiple providers from throughout the SPA or region. Case conferences should be used to identify or clarify issues regarding a participant’s housing status and progress towards permanent housing; to review activities including progress and barriers towards housing; to assign primary Housing Navigation responsibilities; to strategize solutions; and to adjust current service plans, as necessary. Case conferences may be face-to-face or by phone/videoconference, held at routine intervals or during significant change. Case conferencing must be documented and must follow any policies and procedures established for the Coordinated Entry System (CES).

**Case Management**: Case management is defined by the Case Management Society of America as “a collaborative process of assessment, planning, facilitation, care coordination, evaluation, and advocacy for options and services” to meet individual needs. Case Management in the context of the Coordinated Entry System (CES) should be voluntary and client centered, with the goal of identifying strengths and client directed goals, while promoting “health, recognition, and well-being” (USICH, 2016). Case Managers in CES should ultimately focus on linking the client to a permanent housing resource and providing the necessary services needed to promote housing stability. 

**Chronically Homeless**: 1. An individual who: a. Is homeless and lives in a place not meant for human habitation, a safe haven, or in an emergency shelter; AND b. Has been homeless and living or residing in a place not meant for human habitation, a safe haven, or in an emergency shelter continuously for at least twelve months or on at least four separate occasions in the last three years where those occasions cumulatively total at least twelve months; AND c. Can be diagnosed with one or more of the following conditions: substance use disorder, serious mental illness, developmental disability (as defined in section 102 of the Developmental Disabilities Assistance Bill of Rights Act of 2000 [42 U.S.C. 15002]), post-traumatic stress disorder, cognitive impairments resulting from brain injury, or chronic physical illness or disability; 2. An individual who has been residing in an institutional care facility, including a jail, substance abuse or mental health treatment facility, hospital, or other similar facility, for fewer than 90 days and met all of the criteria in paragraph (1) of this definition, before entering that facility; or 3. A family with an adult head of household (or if there is no adult in the family, a minor head of household) who meets all of the criteria in paragraph (1) of this definition, including a family whose composition has fluctuated while the head of household has been homeless.

**Chronically Homeless Family with Children**: A family with children with an adult head of household (or if there is no adult in the family with children, a minor head of household) who meets all of the criteria for a chronically homeless individual, including a family with children whose composition has fluctuated while the head of household has been homeless.

**Continuum of Care (CoC)**: A community plan to organize and deliver housing and services to meet the specific needs of people who are homeless as they move to stable housing and maximize self-sufficiency. It includes action steps to end homelessness and prevent a return to homelessness.” In Los Angeles County, there are four CoCs. The Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority serves all cities of the County with the exception of Long Beach, Pasadena, and Glendale, who each have their own CoC.

**Coordinated Entry System (CES)**: CES is a regionally based system that connects new and existing programs into a “no-wrong-door network” by assessing the needs of individuals/ families/youth experiencing homelessness and linking them with the most appropriate housing and services to end their homelessness. The goal of the CES is to streamline processes through which communities assess, house, and support housing retention for individuals/families who are homeless; to ensure all of our homeless neighbors are known and supported; to target and maximize limited housing resources; and comply with the federal mandate to adopt a standardized intake and coordinated assessment process for housing. The essential components of CES are: 1) a system that is low-barrier and easy to access; 2) a system that identifies and assesses people’s needs; and 3) a system that prioritizes and matches housing resources based on those needs.

**Crisis Housing**: An emergency shelter in the homeless coordinated entry system. Crisis Housing means any facility, the primary purpose of which is to provide temporary shelter for the homeless or to provide a bridge to permanent housing.

**Disability**: An individual with one or more of the following conditions: A. A physical, mental, or emotional impairment, including impairment caused by alcohol or drug abuse, post-traumatic stress disorder, or brain injury that: (1) Is expected to be long-continuing or of indefinite duration; (2) Substantially impedes the individual's ability to live independently; and (3) Could be improved by the provision of more suitable housing conditions. B. A developmental disability, as defined in section 102 of the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act of 2000 (42 U.S.C. 15002); or C. The disease of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) or any condition arising from the etiologic agency for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV). 

**Emergency Shelter (ES)**: Any facility whose primary purpose is to provide temporary shelter for homeless in general or for specific populations of the homeless.

**Evidence of Site Control**: Documentation of an appropriate certificate of occupancy and/or a conditional use permit allowing the legal use of the property for the service/housing being proposed, and at least one of the following types of documentation securing the location for the use of the proposed system component: a) Proof of Ownership; b) Executed Option to Purchase; c) Executed Lease Agreement; d) Executed Option to Lease; e) Letter of Intent signed by both parties.

**General Relief (GR)**: Acounty-funded program that provides financial assistance to indigent adults who are ineligible for Federal or State programs.

**Harm Reduction**: An aspect of a program’s or system’s design established by a set of policies and the resulting procedures and practices whose objective is to reduce the negative consequences of participants’ continued use of drugs and/or alcohol or failure to be medication compliant. In housing settings, harm reduction is intended to prevent a participant’s loss of housing and/or termination from the program based solely on his or her inability to stop using drugs or alcohol or failure to take prescribed medications. Programs incorporating a harm reduction model must utilize all interventions possible, short of termination from the program to enable the participant to reduce or minimize their risky behaviors while at the same time assisting them to move into and become stabilized in permanent housing. Harm reduction is not intended to prevent the termination of a participant whose actions or behavior constitute a threat to the safety of other participants and staff. Organizations must develop a set of policies and procedures to be implemented in the event of such behavior on the part of a participant.

**Homeless**: An individual who belongs to one of the following categories: (1) An individual who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence, meaning: (i) An individual with a primary nighttime residence that is a public or private place not designed for or ordinarily used as a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings, including a car, park, abandoned building, bus or train station, airport, or camping ground;(ii) An individual living in a supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designated to provide temporary living arrangements (including congregate shelters, transitional housing, and hotels and motels paid for by charitable organizations or by federal, state, or local government programs for low-income individuals); or(iii) An individual who is exiting an institution where he or she resided for 90 days or less and who resided in an emergency shelter or place not meant for human habitation immediately before entering that institution;(2) An individual who will imminently lose their primary nighttime residence, provided that: (i) The primary nighttime residence will be lost within 14 days of the date of application for homeless assistance;(ii) No subsequent residence has been identified; and(iii) The individual lacks the resources or support networks,e.g., family, friends, faith-based or other social networks, needed to obtain other permanent housing; (3) Any individual who: (i) Is fleeing, or is attempting to flee, domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, or other dangerous or life-threatening conditions that relate to violence against the individual that has either taken place within the individual's primary nighttime residence or has made the individual afraid to return to their primary nighttime residence;(ii) Has no other residence; and (iii) Lacks the resources or support networks,e.g., family, friends, faith-based or other social networks, to obtain other permanent housing.

**Homeless, defined by DPSS**: Applicants/participants are considered homeless when they lack fixed and regular nighttime residences. If they share a residence with family or friends on a temporary basis; if they have a primary nighttime residencethat is a supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to provide temporary living accommodations; if they reside in a public or private place not designed for or ordinarily used as a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings; if they have a need for housing in a commercial establishment (e.g. hotel/motel), shelter, publicly funded transitional housing or from a person in the business of renting properties, or received an eviction notice or notice to pay rent or quit.

**Housing First**: HousingFirst is an approach that offers permanent housing as quickly as possible for people experiencing homelessness, particularly for people with long histories of homelessness and co-occurring health challenges, while providing the supportive services people need to keep their housing and avoid returning to homelessness. The provider ensures that the supportive services that program participants need or want in order to achieve permanent housing and to increase income are offered, but are not required as a condition of housing, including links to mainstream programs or partner agencies (i.e. mental health services, substance abuse treatment, medical services, child care, etc.). Income, sobriety and/or participation in treatment or other services are voluntary and are not required as a condition for housing.

**Housing Inventory Chart (HIC)**: Consists of three housing inventory charts for: emergency shelter, transitional housing and permanent supportive housing.

**Housing Navigation**: Housing Navigation is the process by which homeless clients that have entered the CES system are provided ongoing engagement, document collection, and case management services in order to facilitate a match to an appropriate housing resource. In the context of CES, outreach workers, case managers, and other homeless service providers may provide housing navigation assistance.

**Housing Navigator(s)**: Housing Navigator is the client’s primary point of contact in CES, often a social worker, case manager, outreach worker, or volunteer. The primary function of the Housing Navigator is to: 1) assist clients in collecting necessary documents for housing applications, 2) accompany clients to housing appointments, and 3) assist clients in navigating the entire housing search and placement process.

**Matched**: Matched is the process by which an individual in CES is determined to be eligible or initially eligible for a housing resource, and is “matched” to that resource.

**Outreach**: In the context of the CES system, Outreach is defined as the activity of engaging a homeless individual through the process of rapport building with the goal of linking that individual to a permanent housing resource. Outreach and engagement is an ongoing process that “involves creativity, flexibility, may take months or years, and involves establishing a relationship” to connect a client to services (Olivet, Bassuk, Elstad, Kenny, and Jassil, 2010). Outreach can be viewed as a“service in itself” and “a process of building a personal connection that may play a role in helping a person improve his or her housing, health status, or social support network” (Olivet, Bassuk, Elstad, Kenny, and Jassil, 2010). Outreach and engagement should be approached in a client-centered and voluntary manner that does not create any time constraints as to the alacrity in which the client voluntarily seeks permanent housing. Outreach workers should have the capacity to refer clients to resources and services such as Crisis & Bridge (Reserved Crisis) Housing and should regularly participate in case conferencing to ensure clients entering CES are matched to the appropriate permanent housing resource. 

**Outreach Coordination**: Theplanning and ongoing coordination of outreach activities in a region. This should include a multi-disciplinary approach that ensures adequate geographic coverage and the use of best practices to outreach. 

**Parenting Youth**: A youth who identifies as the parent or legal guardian of one or more children who are present with or sleeping in the same place as that youth parent, where there is no person over age 24 in the household. 

**Permanent Housing (PH)**: Community-based housing without a designated length of stay, which includes both Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH) and Rapid Rehousing (RRH). Examples of permanent housing include, but are not limited to, a house or apartment with a month-to-month or annual lease term or home ownership. 

**Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH)**: Long-term, community-based housing that has supportive services for homeless persons with disabilities. This type of supportive housing enables the special needs of populations to live independently as possible in a permanent setting. Permanent housing can be provided in one structure or in several structures at one site or in multiple structures at scattered sites. 

**Point in Time (PIT)**: A snapshot of the homeless population taken on a given day. Since 2005, HUD requires all CoC applicants to complete this count every other year in the last week of January. This count includes a street count in addition to a count of all clients in emergency and transitional beds.

**Rapid Rehousing (RRH)**: Asupport intervention that uses a combination of case management, Housing Navigation, and short to medium term financial assistance to assist mid-range acuity homeless households identify and stabilize in tenant-based, scattered site, permanent housing.

**Regional Coordination**: Oversight of SPA-wide partnerships across public and private entities that ensure homeless persons are fully supported and connected to housing and services within their respective communities. Regional and coordinated access to housing and services ensures that a homeless person does not have to go to multiple agencies to obtain housing and services assistance.

**Rent Reasonableness**: The total rent charged for a unit must be reasonable in relation to the rents being charged during the same time period for comparable units in the private unassisted market and must not be in excess of rents being charged by the owner during the same period for comparable non-luxury unassisted units. Such determinations should consider: (a) location, quality, size, type, and age of unit; and (b) any amenities, housing services, maintenance and utilities to be provided by the owner. Comparable rents may be verified by using a market study, reviewing comparable units advertised for rent, or by obtaining written verification from the property owner documenting comparable rents for other units owned.

**Social Enterprise -Social Enterprises are profit or non-profit organizations whose primary purpose is “common good to advance their social, environmental and human justice agendas.” Many Social Enterprises provide a supportive work environment for those with significant barriers to employment. Social Enterprises provide those with barriers to employment, including individuals experiencing homelessness, those reentering the community from incarceration, Veterans, disconnected youth, and those with disabilities, subsidized transitional employment combined with case management, supportive services and job readiness skills to prepare the hard-to-serve individual for unsubsidized, permanent employment.

**Supportive Services**: Services that may assist homeless participants in the transition from the streets or shelters into permanent or permanent supportive housing, and that assist persons with living successfully in housing.

**Transition Age Youth (TAY)**: An individual between the ages of 16 and 24. Please note that while the Youth Coordinated Entry System serves youth and young adults, ages 16-24, for the purposes of Rapid Rehousing and other housing resources that require a lease to be signed, youth must be at least 18 years old to sign a lease.* Therefore, for the program area of Rapid Rehousing, TAY are defined as youth ages 18-26. *Youth under age 18 who have legally emancipated are legally able to sign a lease. However, the prevalence of youth who have emancipated before age 18 is rare.

**Transitional Housing (TH)**: Transitional housing (TH) is designed to provide homeless individuals and families with the interim stability and support to successfully move to and maintain permanent housing. Transitional housing may be used to cover the costs of up to 24 months of housing with accompanying supportive services. Program participants must have a lease (or sublease) or occupancy agreement in place when residing in transitional housing.

**Unaccompanied Youth**: Unaccompanied youth are persons under age 18 who are not accompanied by a parent or guardian and are not a parent presenting with or sleeping in the same place as his/her child(ren). Unaccompanied youth are single youth, youth couples, and groups of youth presenting together as a household.

**Unduplicated Count**: The number of people who are homeless within a specified location and time period. An unduplicated count ensures that individuals are counted only once regardless of the number of times they entered or exited the homeless system or the number of programs in which they participated.

**Veteran**: This subpopulation category of the PIT includes adults who have served on active duty in the Armed Forces of the United States. This does not include inactive military reserves or the National Guard unless the person was called up to active duty.

**Victims of Domestic Violence**: This subpopulation category of the PIT includes adults who have been victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking.

**Victim service provider**: A private nonprofit organization whose primary mission is to provide services to victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking. This term includes rape crisis centers, battered women’s shelters, domestic violence transitional housing programs, and other programs. 

**Youth**: Persons under age 25, including children under age 18 and young adults ages 18 to 24.
